README.md, before:


<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# sigverse <img src="man/figures/hex_v1_96dpi.png" align="right" height="120"/>

<!-- badges: start -->

[![Lifecycle:
experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/lifecycle-experimental-orange.svg)](https://lifecycle.r-lib.org/articles/stages.html#experimental)

<!-- badges: end -->

The **sigverse** simplifies evaluation, exploration, visualisation of
mutational signatures in R.

<img src="./man/figures/sigverse_summary_wide_v1_300dpi.png"
style="width:100%" />

The **sigverse** does **NOT** seek to provide custom implementations for
running signature analyses.

It simply provides tools for evaluating, exploring, and reporting the
results signature analyses done with any existing signature analysis
frameworks (although we recommend
[sigminer](https://github.com/ShixiangWang/sigminer) if you’re using R).

**WARNING: Sigverse is in early development, and not yet ready for use**

## Installation

You can install the development version of sigverse from
[GitHub](https://github.com/) with:

``` r
if (!require("pak", quietly = TRUE))
    install.packages("pak")

pak::pak("selkamand/sigverse")
```

## Usage

### Visualisation

1.  Visualise Signatures

``` r
library(sigverse)
#> ── Attaching core sigverse packages ───────────────────── sigverse 0.0.0.9000 ──
#> ✔ sigshared 0.0.0.9000     ✔ sigstats  0.0.0.9000
#> ✔ sigsim    0.0.0.9000     ✔ sigstory  0.0.0.9000
#> ✔ sigstash  0.0.0.9000     ✔ sigvis    0.0.0.9000

# Load signatures from sigstash
signatures <- sig_load("COSMIC_v3.3.1_SBS_GRCh38")

# Visualise a single signature
sig_visualise(signatures[["SBS5"]])
#> ✔ All channels matched perfectly to set [sbs_96]. Using this set for sort order
#> ✔ All types matched perfectly to set [sbs_type]. Using this set for sort order
#> ✔ Types matched perfectly to palette [snv_type]
```

<img src="man/figures/README-unnamed-chunk-2-1.png" width="100%" />

2.  Visualise Catalogues

``` r

# Load mutational profile catalogue from sigstash
brca_catalalogue <- sig_load_catalogue('BRCA')

# Visualise an observed mutational catalogue
sig_visualise(
  brca_catalalogue[['TCGA-D8-A1XU-01A-11D-A14K-09']],
  class = "catalogue"
  )
```

3.  Visualise a Signature Model

The primary output of ANY signature analyse is a model which describes
the set of signatures which, when combined with certain weights
approximate the observed mutational pattern in a sample. For example the
model might look like

Signature1 \* 0.2 + Signature2 \* 0.3 + Signature3 \* 0.5 = Simulated
Catalogue that (hopefully) represents the observed profile.

We can visualise a signature model as follows

``` r

# Load a signature from sigstash
signatures <- sig_load("COSMIC_v3.3.1_SBS_GRCh38")

# Build a signature model signature 'SBS2' explains 40% of the mutations in a sample, and 'SBS13' explains the remaining 60%
model = sig_combine(signatures, model = c('SBS2' = 0.4, 'SBS13' = 0.6))

# Visualise the model
sig_visualise(model, class = 'model')
#> ✔ All channels matched perfectly to set [sbs_96]. Using this set for sort order
#> ✔ All types matched perfectly to set [sbs_type]. Using this set for sort order
#> ✔ Types matched perfectly to palette [snv_type]
```

<img src="man/figures/README-unnamed-chunk-4-1.png" width="100%" />

4.  Visualize a cohort

If you’ve got sequencing results from a cohort, sigvis lets you either.

1.  Visualise the results of a sample of interest in the context of the
    broader cohort

2.  Visualise the cohort trends

The input to the visualiser is a ‘cohort signature dataframe’ (see
sigvis for details)

``` r

# Load cohort signature results from sigstash
cohort = sig_load_sigstash_tcga('BRCA')

# Visualise Cohort
sig_visualise_cohort(cohort)


# Contextualize Sample with Cohort Results
sig_visualise_sample_in_cohort(cohort, 'TCGA-D8-A1XU') 
```

### Reporting

After running a signature analysis on your sample of interest, produce a
html report describing the result.

The core report generation engine requires high level information that
most signature analyses will output, irrespective of the exact methods
used.

In this example we manually define the properties of our model to
demonstrate the expected inputs

``` r

# Specify your catalogue
observed_catalogue = example_catalogue

# Specify your model
model = c('SBS1' = 0.4, 'SBS2' = 0.5)

# Specify aetiologies of any signatures in your model
aetiology = list(
  SBS1 = 'Spontaneous deamination of 5-methylcytosine (clock like signature)',
  SBS2 = 'Activity of APOBEC family of cytidine deaminases'
  )

# Specify similar samples (optional, only supply if you want to compare to some larger cohort)
similar_samples = data.frame(
  sample_id = c('Sample1', 'Sample2', 'Sample3'),
  cosine_similarity = c(0.96, 0.95, 0.8)
)


# Produce the html report
sig_story(
  observed = observed_catalogue
  model = model,
  aetiology = aetiology,
  similar_samples = similar_samples
)
```

### Simulation

sigsim allows you to simulate mutational catalogues by combining
different mutational signatures, plus spike known amounts of noise. This
can be useful for benchmarking signature tools.

``` r

# Load signatures from sigstash
signatures <- sig_load("COSMIC_v3.3.1_SBS_GRCh38")


# Simulate Signatures
sig_simulate(signatures, c('SBS3', "SBS4"))
```

### Statistics

sigstats contains functionality to compute basic signature related
statistics. For example, computing cosine similarity of two mutational
catalogues.

### Utilities

sigshared is a collection of utilities that most packages in the
sigverse use. It contains functions to help identify input types, assert
they’re as expected.

## Key Object Types

The sigverse needs to work downstream of many different signature
analysis tools. To maximise interoperability all expected inputs are
simple dataframes and lists, rather than sigverse specific S3/S4/R8/R7
objects.

All data types used by sigverse packages are described in [sigshared
documentation](https://github.com/selkamand/sigshared)

## Similar tools

Most signature analysis packages provide their own suite of
visualisation and exploration tools. To simplify your software stack, we
recommend only using the sigverse for the following reasons:

1.  you run multiple signature analysis tools and want a uniform way of
    exploring the results

2.  want to benchmark signature analysis packages

3.  Find missing functionality (e.g. cohort signature result exploration
    / no reporting modules)

## Links to sigverse packages

- [sigstash](https://github.com/selkamand/sigstash) for signature
  collections

- [sigvis](https://github.com/selkamand/sigvis) for signature
  visualisation

- [sigstats](https://github.com/selkamand/sigstats) for signature
  statistics (e.g. cosine similarity)

- [sigsim](https://github.com/selkamand/sigsim) for simulating
  signatures / sample profiles

- [sigstory](https://github.com/selkamand/sigstory) for reporting
  results of signature analyses

- [sigshared](https://github.com/selkamand/sigshared) for utilities used
  by many of the sigverse packages

## Links to sigverse-adjacent packages

- [TCGAcatalogues](https://github.com/selkamand/TCGAcatalogues) for
  loading TCGA sample catalogues

Commit message:

docs: updated to reflect status in sigverse

README.md, after:


<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# sigverse <img src="man/figures/hex_v1_96dpi.png" align="right" height="120"/>

<!-- badges: start -->

[![Lifecycle:
experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/lifecycle-experimental-orange.svg)](https://lifecycle.r-lib.org/articles/stages.html#experimental)

<!-- badges: end -->

The **sigverse** simplifies evaluation, exploration, visualisation of
mutational signatures in R.

<img src="./man/figures/sigverse_summary_wide_v1_300dpi.png"
style="width:100%" />

The **sigverse** does **NOT** seek to provide custom implementations for
running signature analyses.

It simply provides tools for evaluating, exploring, and reporting the
results signature analyses done with any existing signature analysis
frameworks (although we recommend
[sigminer](https://github.com/ShixiangWang/sigminer) if you’re using R).

**WARNING: Sigverse is in early development, and not yet ready for use**

## Installation

You can install the development version of sigverse from
[GitHub](https://github.com/) with:

``` r
if (!require("pak", quietly = TRUE))
    install.packages("pak")

pak::pak("selkamand/sigverse")
```

## Usage

### Visualisation

1.  Visualise Signatures

``` r
library(sigverse)
#> ── Attaching core sigverse packages ───────────────────── sigverse 0.0.0.9000 ──
#> ✔ sigshared 0.0.0.9000     ✔ sigstats  0.0.0.9000
#> ✔ sigsim    0.0.0.9000     ✔ sigstory  0.0.0.9000
#> ✔ sigstash  0.0.0.9000     ✔ sigvis    0.0.0.9000
```

``` r

# Load signatures from sigstash
signatures <- sig_load("COSMIC_v3.3.1_SBS_GRCh38")

# Visualise a single signature
sig_visualise(signatures[["SBS5"]])
#> ✔ All channels matched perfectly to set [sbs_96]. Using this set for sort order
#> ✔ All types matched perfectly to set [sbs_type]. Using this set for sort order
#> ✔ Types matched perfectly to palette [snv_type]
```

<img src="man/figures/README-unnamed-chunk-2-1.png" width="100%" />

2.  Visualise Catalogues

Note to access the TCGA catalogues first install the datasets using
`remotes::install_github("selkamand/TCGAcatalogues")`

``` r
# Load mutational profile catalogue from the TCGAcatalogues package
library(TCGAcatalogues) 
brca_catalalogue <- catalogues_load('BRCA')

# Visualise an observed mutational catalogue
sig_visualise(
  brca_catalalogue[['TCGA-D8-A1XU-01A-11D-A14K-09']],
  class = "catalogue"
  )
#> ✔ All channels matched perfectly to set [sbs_96]. Using this set for sort order
#> ✔ All types matched perfectly to set [sbs_type]. Using this set for sort order
#> ✔ Types matched perfectly to palette [snv_type]
```

<img src="man/figures/README-unnamed-chunk-3-1.png" width="100%" />

3.  Visualise a Signature Model

The primary output of ANY signature analyse is a model which describes
the set of signatures which, when combined with certain weights
approximate the observed mutational pattern in a sample. For example the
model might look like

Signature1 \* 0.2 + Signature2 \* 0.3 + Signature3 \* 0.5 = Simulated
Catalogue that (hopefully) represents the observed profile.

We can visualise a signature model as follows

``` r

# Load a signature from sigstash
signatures <- sig_load("COSMIC_v3.3.1_SBS_GRCh38")

# Build a signature model signature 'SBS2' explains 40% of the mutations in a sample, and 'SBS13' explains the remaining 60%
model = sig_combine(signatures, model = c('SBS2' = 0.4, 'SBS13' = 0.6), format = "combined")

# Visualise the model
sig_visualise(model, class = 'model')
#> ✔ All channels matched perfectly to set [sbs_96]. Using this set for sort order
#> ✔ All types matched perfectly to set [sbs_type]. Using this set for sort order
#> ✔ Types matched perfectly to palette [snv_type]
```

<img src="man/figures/README-unnamed-chunk-4-1.png" width="100%" />

4.  Visualize a cohort

> **Warning**
>
> Cohort visualisations are not yet available in the sigverse

If you’ve got sequencing results from a cohort, sigvis lets you either.

1.  Visualise the results of a sample of interest in the context of the
    broader cohort

2.  Visualise the cohort trends

The input to the visualiser is a ‘cohort signature dataframe’ (see
sigvis for details)

``` r

# Load cohort signature results from sigstash
cohort = sig_load_sigstash_tcga('BRCA')

# Visualise Cohort
sig_visualise_cohort(cohort)


# Contextualize Sample with Cohort Results
sig_visualise_sample_in_cohort(cohort, 'TCGA-D8-A1XU') 
```

### Reporting

> **Warning**
>
> Interactive sample reports are not yet available in the sigverse

After running a signature analysis on your sample of interest, produce a
html report describing the result.

The core report generation engine requires high level information that
most signature analyses will output, irrespective of the exact methods
used.

In this example we manually define the properties of our model to
demonstrate the expected inputs

``` r

# Specify your catalogue
observed_catalogue = example_catalogue

# Specify your model
model = c('SBS1' = 0.4, 'SBS2' = 0.5)

# Specify aetiologies of any signatures in your model
aetiology = list(
  SBS1 = 'Spontaneous deamination of 5-methylcytosine (clock like signature)',
  SBS2 = 'Activity of APOBEC family of cytidine deaminases'
  )

# Specify similar samples (optional, only supply if you want to compare to some larger cohort)
similar_samples = data.frame(
  sample_id = c('Sample1', 'Sample2', 'Sample3'),
  cosine_similarity = c(0.96, 0.95, 0.8)
)


# Produce the html report
sig_story(
  observed = observed_catalogue
  model = model,
  aetiology = aetiology,
  similar_samples = similar_samples
)
```

### Simulation

> **Warning**
>
> Simulation functions are not yet available in the sigverse

sigsim allows you to simulate mutational catalogues by combining
different mutational signatures, plus spike known amounts of noise. This
can be useful for benchmarking signature tools.

``` r

# Load signatures from sigstash
signatures <- sig_load("COSMIC_v3.3.1_SBS_GRCh38")


# Simulate Signatures
sig_simulate(signatures, c('SBS3' = 0.5, "SBS4" = 0.5))
```

### Statistics

sigstats contains functionality to compute basic signature related
statistics. For example, computing cosine similarity of two mutational
catalogues.

### Utilities

sigshared is a collection of utilities that most packages in the
sigverse use. It contains functions to help identify input types, assert
they’re as expected.

## Key Object Types

The sigverse needs to work downstream of many different signature
analysis tools. To maximise interoperability all expected inputs are
simple dataframes and lists, rather than sigverse specific S3/S4/R8/R7
objects.

All data types used by sigverse packages are described in [sigshared
documentation](https://github.com/selkamand/sigshared)

## Similar tools

Most signature analysis packages provide their own suite of
visualisation and exploration tools. To simplify your software stack, we
recommend only using the sigverse for the following reasons:

1.  you run multiple signature analysis tools and want a uniform way of
    exploring the results

2.  want to benchmark signature analysis packages

3.  Find missing functionality (e.g. cohort signature result exploration
    / no reporting modules)

## Links to sigverse packages

- [sigstash](https://github.com/selkamand/sigstash) for signature
  collections

- [sigvis](https://github.com/selkamand/sigvis) for signature
  visualisation

- [sigstats](https://github.com/selkamand/sigstats) for signature
  statistics (e.g. cosine similarity)

- [sigsim](https://github.com/selkamand/sigsim) for simulating
  signatures / sample profiles

- [sigstory](https://github.com/selkamand/sigstory) for reporting
  results of signature analyses

- [sigshared](https://github.com/selkamand/sigshared) for utilities used
  by many of the sigverse packages

## Links to sigverse-adjacent packages

- [TCGAcatalogues](https://github.com/selkamand/TCGAcatalogues) for
  loading TCGA sample catalogues
